spectf_cloud/README.md, before:

# SpecTf: Transformers Enable Data-Driven Imaging Spectroscopy Cloud Detection

Jake H. Lee, Michael Kiper, David R. Thompson, Philip G. Brodrick. *In Review.*

Preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.04916

<img src="figures/fig1.png" width="50%">


## 📝 Description

This repository contains the source code used to implement, evaluate, and deploy the SpecTf for EMIT Cloud Masks.

This is a specific implementation of the SpecTf model.

The datasets associated with this repository are available at:

> Lee, J., Kiper, M., Thompson, D. R., & Brodrick, P. (2025). Dataset for "Spectroscopic Transformer for Improved EMIT Cloud Masks" [Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14607937


## 💾 Installation
To install the `SpecTf Cloud` python package to use as both:
- An importable Python3 package
- A CLI interface for model training and deployment
follow the below instructions:

1. [Install GDAL](https://gdal.org/en/stable/download.html)
2. `make dev-install` from the repository root.
3. Future versions will be deployed on PyPI.


## 📁 Project Directory Structure
Here's an overview of the key files and directories in this repository:

### **Directories**
| Directory | Description |
|-----------|------------|
| **`datasets/`** | Descriptions and definitions for ML-ready datasets used for training and validation. |
| **`evaluation/`** | Scripts to evaluate the model with the test dataset and produce performance metrics. |
| **`comparison_models/`** | Scripts to reproduce the GBT and ANN comparison models from the paper. |

---

### **Key Files**
| File | Description |
|------|------------|
| **`dataset.py`** | PyTorch dataloader for ML-ready datasets and EMIT scene rasters. |
| **`deploy.py`** | Primary script to produce EMIT Cloud Masks. See [Usage](#Usage) for details. |
| **`irr.npy`** | Solar irradiance data for Top-of-Atmosphere calculations. |
| **`model.py`** | SpecTf model architecture definition in PyTorch. |
| **`toa.py`** | Helper script for calculating the Top-of-Atmosphere Reflectance in-memory. |
| **`train.py`** | Training script to retrain/reproduce the SpecTf Cloud model. See [Usage](#Usage) for details. |
| **`arch.yml`** | Plaintext definition of model architecture parameters. |
| **`weights.pt`** | Pretrained SpecTf model weights. |

---

### **Notes**
- The `deploy.py` and `train.py` scripts are the **main entry points** for model inference and training.
- `datasets/` and `evaluation/` contain **important assets** for benchmarking the model.


## 🚀 Usage
At any point, you can navigate the CLI with the `-h` `--help` flags 
```
$ spectf-cloud -h

 Usage: spectf-cloud [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

╭─ Options ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --version        Display the current SpecTf version.                                                  │
│ --help     -h    Show this message and exit.                                                          │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
╭─ Commands ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ cloud-eval             Evaluation commands for SpecTf and L2A Baseline.                               │
│ deploy                 Produce a SpecTf transformer-generated cloud mask.                             │
│ train                  Train the SpecTf Hyperspectral Transformer Model.                              │
│ train-comparison       Training commands for the ResNet and XGBoost comparison models.                │
│ tui                    Open Textual TUI.                                                              │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

### 🌈 Using `SpecTf Cloud` to cloud mask your EMIT Scene ☁️

**1. Download the L1B raster products**

EMIT L1B At-Sensor Calibrated Radiance and Geolocation Data is available from the LPDAAC: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/emitl1bradv001/

**2. [Install SpecTf Cloud](#Installation)**

Verify it's installed properly with
```
$ which spectf-cloud
<some-version>
```

**2. Use the CLI to Run SpecTf Cloud**

```
$ spectf-cloud deploy -h

 Usage: spectf-cloud deploy [OPTIONS] OUTFP OBSFP RDNFP

 Produce a SpecTf transformer-generated cloud mask.

╭─ Options ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --threshold       FLOAT    Threshold for cloud classification. [default: 0.52]                        │
│ --device          INTEGER  Device specification for PyTorch (-1 for CPU, 0+ for GPU, MPS if           │
│                            available).                                                                │
│                            [default: -1]                                                              │
│ --arch-spec       FILE     Filepath to model architecture YAML specification. [default: arch.yml]     │
│ --irradiance      FILE     Filepath to irradiance numpy file. [default: irr.npy]                      │
│ --weights         FILE     Filepath to trained model weights. [default: weights.pt]                   │
│ --proba                    Output probability map instead of binary cloud mask.                       │
│ --keep-bands               Keep all bands in the spectra (use for non-EMIT data).                     │
│ --help        -h           Show this message and exit.                                                │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

Example:
```
$ spectf-cloud deploy /path/to/outfile /path/to/obsfile /path/to/radiance/file
```

### 👨‍🔬 Reproduce/Retrain the SpecTf Cloud model 🚂

**1. Download the datasets from Zenodo into `datasets/`**

The ML-ready dataset is available at:

> Lee, J., Kiper, M., Thompson, D. R., & Brodrick, P. (2025). Dataset for "Spectroscopic Transformer for Improved EMIT Cloud Masks" [Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14607938

**2. Run the training script**

To reproduce the reported SpecTf Cloud model:

```
$ spectf-cloud train \
    datasets/spectf_cloud_labelbox.hdf5 \
    datasets/spectf_cloud_mmgis.hdf5 \
    --seed          42 \
    --train-csv     datasets/train_fids.csv \
    --test-csv      datasets/test_fids.csv \
    --outdir        out/ \
    --wandb-entity  <Weights and Biases entity> \
    --wandb-project <Weights and Biases project> \
    --wandb-name    <Weights and Biases run name> \
    --epochs        30 \
    --batch         256 \
    --lr            0.0001 \
    --gpu           0 \
    --arch-ff       64 \
    --arch-heads    8 \
    --arch-dropout  0.05 \
    --arch-agg      max \
    --arch-proj-dim 64 
```

**All training options:**
```
$ spectf-cloud train -h

 Usage: spectf-cloud train [OPTIONS] DATASET...

 Train the SpecTf Hyperspectral Transformer Model.

╭─ Options ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│    --seed               INTEGER          Training run seed. [default: 42]                                       │
│    --arch-proj-dim      INTEGER          Projection dimensions. [default: 64]                                   │
│    --arch-agg           [mean|max|flat]  Aggregate method prior to classification. [default: max]               │
│    --arch-dropout       FLOAT            Dropout percentage for overfit prevention. [default: 0.1]              │
│    --arch-heads         INTEGER          Number of heads for multihead attention. [default: 8]                  │
│    --arch-ff            INTEGER          Feed-forward dimensions. [default: 64]                                 │
│    --gpu                INTEGER          GPU device to use (-1 means CPU). [default: -1]                        │
│    --lr                 FLOAT            Learning rate for training. [default: 0.0001]                          │
│    --batch              INTEGER          Batch size for training. [default: 256]                                │
│    --epochs             INTEGER          Number of epochs for training. [default: 50]                           │
│    --wandb-name         TEXT             Project name to be appended to timestamp for wandb name. [default: ""] │
│    --wandb-project      TEXT             WandB project to be logged to. [default: ""]                           │
│    --wandb-entity       TEXT             WandB entity. [default: ""]                                            │
│    --outdir             TEXT             Output directory for models. [default: ./outdir]                       │
│ *  --test-csv           FILE             Filepath to test FID csv. [required]                                   │
│ *  --train-csv          FILE             Filepath to train FID csv. [required]                                  │
│    --help           -h                   Show this message and exit.                                            │
╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

Commit message:

Added Save Every Epoch Option

spectf_cloud/README.md, after:

# SpecTf: Transformers Enable Data-Driven Imaging Spectroscopy Cloud Detection

Jake H. Lee, Michael Kiper, David R. Thompson, Philip G. Brodrick. *In Review.*

Preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.04916

<img src="figures/fig1.png" width="50%">


## 📝 Description

This repository contains the source code used to implement, evaluate, and deploy the SpecTf for EMIT Cloud Masks.

This is a specific implementation of the SpecTf model.

The datasets associated with this repository are available at:

> Lee, J., Kiper, M., Thompson, D. R., & Brodrick, P. (2025). Dataset for "Spectroscopic Transformer for Improved EMIT Cloud Masks" [Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14607937


## 💾 Installation
To install the `SpecTf Cloud` python package to use as both:
- An importable Python3 package
- A CLI interface for model training and deployment
follow the below instructions:

1. [Install GDAL](https://gdal.org/en/stable/download.html) (if you have trouble installing, try `conda install -c conda-forge gdal`)
2. `make dev-install` from the repository root.
3. Future versions will be deployed on PyPI.


## 📁 Project Directory Structure
Here's an overview of the key files and directories in this repository:

### **Directories**
| Directory | Description |
|-----------|------------|
| **`datasets/`** | Descriptions and definitions for ML-ready datasets used for training and validation. |
| **`evaluation/`** | Scripts to evaluate the model with the test dataset and produce performance metrics. |
| **`comparison_models/`** | Scripts to reproduce the GBT and ANN comparison models from the paper. |

---

### **Key Files**
| File | Description |
|------|------------|
| **`dataset.py`** | PyTorch dataloader for ML-ready datasets and EMIT scene rasters. |
| **`deploy.py`** | Primary script to produce EMIT Cloud Masks. See [Usage](#Usage) for details. |
| **`irr.npy`** | Solar irradiance data for Top-of-Atmosphere calculations. |
| **`model.py`** | SpecTf model architecture definition in PyTorch. |
| **`toa.py`** | Helper script for calculating the Top-of-Atmosphere Reflectance in-memory. |
| **`train.py`** | Training script to retrain/reproduce the SpecTf Cloud model. See [Usage](#Usage) for details. |
| **`arch.yml`** | Plaintext definition of model architecture parameters. |
| **`weights.pt`** | Pretrained SpecTf model weights. |

---

### **Notes**
- The `deploy.py` and `train.py` scripts are the **main entry points** for model inference and training.
- `datasets/` and `evaluation/` contain **important assets** for benchmarking the model.


## 🚀 Usage
At any point, you can navigate the CLI with the `-h` `--help` flags 
```
$ spectf-cloud -h

 Usage: spectf-cloud [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

╭─ Options ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --version        Display the current SpecTf version.                                                  │
│ --help     -h    Show this message and exit.                                                          │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
╭─ Commands ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ cloud-eval             Evaluation commands for SpecTf and L2A Baseline.                               │
│ deploy                 Produce a SpecTf transformer-generated cloud mask.                             │
│ train                  Train the SpecTf Hyperspectral Transformer Model.                              │
│ train-comparison       Training commands for the ResNet and XGBoost comparison models.                │
│ tui                    Open Textual TUI.                                                              │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

### 🌈 Using `SpecTf Cloud` to cloud mask your EMIT Scene ☁️

**1. Download the L1B raster products**

EMIT L1B At-Sensor Calibrated Radiance and Geolocation Data is available from the LPDAAC: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/emitl1bradv001/

**2. [Install SpecTf Cloud](#Installation)**

Verify it's installed properly with
```
$ which spectf-cloud
<some-version>
```

**2. Use the CLI to Run SpecTf Cloud**

```
$ spectf-cloud deploy -h

 Usage: spectf-cloud deploy [OPTIONS] OUTFP OBSFP RDNFP

 Produce a SpecTf transformer-generated cloud mask.

╭─ Options ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ --threshold       FLOAT    Threshold for cloud classification. [default: 0.52]                        │
│ --device          INTEGER  Device specification for PyTorch (-1 for CPU, 0+ for GPU, MPS if           │
│                            available).                                                                │
│                            [default: -1]                                                              │
│ --arch-spec       FILE     Filepath to model architecture YAML specification. [default: arch.yml]     │
│ --irradiance      FILE     Filepath to irradiance numpy file. [default: irr.npy]                      │
│ --weights         FILE     Filepath to trained model weights. [default: weights.pt]                   │
│ --proba                    Output probability map instead of binary cloud mask.                       │
│ --keep-bands               Keep all bands in the spectra (use for non-EMIT data).                     │
│ --help        -h           Show this message and exit.                                                │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

Example:
```
$ spectf-cloud deploy /path/to/outfile /path/to/obsfile /path/to/radiance/file
```

### 👨‍🔬 Reproduce/Retrain the SpecTf Cloud model 🚂

**1. Download the datasets from Zenodo into `datasets/`**

The ML-ready dataset is available at:

> Lee, J., Kiper, M., Thompson, D. R., & Brodrick, P. (2025). Dataset for "Spectroscopic Transformer for Improved EMIT Cloud Masks" [Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14607938

**2. Run the training script**

To reproduce the reported SpecTf Cloud model:

```
$ spectf-cloud train \
    datasets/spectf_cloud_labelbox.hdf5 \
    datasets/spectf_cloud_mmgis.hdf5 \
    --seed          42 \
    --train-csv     datasets/train_fids.csv \
    --test-csv      datasets/test_fids.csv \
    --outdir        out/ \
    --wandb-entity  <Weights and Biases entity> \
    --wandb-project <Weights and Biases project> \
    --wandb-name    <Weights and Biases run name> \
    --epochs        30 \
    --batch         256 \
    --lr            0.0001 \
    --gpu           0 \
    --arch-ff       64 \
    --arch-heads    8 \
    --arch-dropout  0.05 \
    --arch-agg      max \
    --arch-proj-dim 64 
```

**All training options:**
```
$ spectf-cloud train --help

 Usage: spectf-cloud train [OPTIONS] DATASET...

 Train the SpecTf Hyperspectral Transformer Model.

╭─ Options ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│    --save-every-epoch                       Save the model's state every epoch.                         │
│    --seed                  INTEGER          Training run seed. [default: 42]                            │
│    --arch-proj-dim         INTEGER          Projection dimensions. [default: 64]                        │
│    --arch-agg              [mean|max|flat]  Aggregate method prior to classification. [default: max]    │
│    --arch-dropout          FLOAT            Dropout percentage for overfit prevention. [default: 0.1]   │
│    --arch-heads            INTEGER          Number of heads for multihead attention. [default: 8]       │
│    --arch-ff               INTEGER          Feed-forward dimensions. [default: 64]                      │
│    --gpu                   INTEGER          GPU device to use (-1 means CPU). [default: -1]             │
│    --lr                    FLOAT            Learning rate for training. [default: 0.0001]               │
│    --batch                 INTEGER          Batch size for training. [default: 256]                     │
│    --epochs                INTEGER          Number of epochs for training. [default: 50]                │
│    --wandb-name            TEXT             Project name to be appended to timestamp for wandb name.    │
│                                             [default: ""]                                               │
│    --wandb-project         TEXT             WandB project to be logged to. [default: ""]                │
│    --wandb-entity          TEXT             WandB entity. [default: ""]                                 │
│    --outdir                TEXT             Output directory for models. [default: ./outdir]            │
│ *  --test-csv              FILE             Filepath to test FID csv. [required]                        │
│ *  --train-csv             FILE             Filepath to train FID csv. [required]                       │
│    --help              -h                   Show this message and exit.                                 │
╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```
